---
title: The Invisible Web Master
subtitle: Flute making and the internet
cloudinary_id: ''
---

     I've been on the internet, as a flute maker, since 1998.  I launched my first website within about six months of establishing my business, and there were not a lot of flute makers with an online presence at that time.  But the internet was exploding and pretty much all businesses large and small had begun to recognize that they had better get online or go extinct.
		 My first website was about as simple as they came back then, and I built it with the help of my retired father (former computer programmer from way back) who figured out how to do the HTML code.  It didn't look like much, and by today's standards it was barely functional.  Making changes was slow and tedious, and as a result the site remained static for years.  It just had a few photos of my work, a blurb about me and a contact phone number.
		 About six years later, a family member suggested that I update the site and try one of the many new website building/hosting services that were out there.  One was called Homestead, and it allowed me to host my website, but it also gave me tools to really exert some control over the content of my site in a quick and easy way.  It was awesome!  It didn't look particularly sophisticated, but it did allow me to at least exapand my site and design the content without having to go through the onerous process of learning to use some of the very complex web design software that was out there.  I stayed with this service for about five or six years before I began to feel the need for something more professional looking.
		 Along the way to this decision, I had made the acquaintance of a young web designer named Jared White.  I met Jared through his mother who was a flute customer of mine.  Apart from being a gifted musician himself, Jared was also a self-taught computer programmer who virtually grew up from childhood writing code and working with computers.  By the time we met in his early twenties he was doing professional web design, and I approached him with the idea of building a new website that I had conceived with my friend Jeff Ball, a noted performer on the Native American flute.  Jeff and I had envisioned creating an online resource for flute players that would combine a chat forum with a variety of other features, such as a multi-author blog, user-powered music sharing (with embedded MP3 players)